Document building farmOS with Composer (#648)
farmOS/farmOS: docs/hosting/composer.md

https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/using-composer/starting-a-site-using-drupal-composer-project-templates

For example, to create a new project based on Drupal's `recommended-project`
template:

    composer create-project drupal/recommended-project

This will initialize a `composer.json` and `composer.lock` file that serves as
a template for a Drupal website.

### farmOS project template

farmOS provides its own project template:
https://packagist.org/packages/farmOS/project

The official farmOS releases are built from this template. It can also be used
to start your own project based on farmOS. This process is described in the
next section.

## Starting your farmOS project

To start your own project based on the farmOS project template, open a new
directory and run the following command:

    composer create-project farmos/project

This will create a `composer.json` file in your directory, copied directly from
the [farmOS project template](https://packagist.org/packages/farmos/project).

You can use this `composer.json` as the starting point for your own project's
code repository with [Git](https://git-scm.com/):

    git init
    git add composer.json

>     git commit -m 'Intitial commit of my farmOS project.'

Reviewer: I think we'll get better (more consistent) syntax highlighting with "fences" and a type hint...

~~~markdown
```sh
git init
git add composer.json
git commit -m 'Intitial commit of my farmOS project.'
```
~~~

Author: Good idea.

Changed here: https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS/pull/648/commits/49b3b9a65ed3d04e005f918488780f9dfd88de1e

Open `composer.json` in a text editor and change the metadata (eg: `name`,
`description`, `homepage`, etc) to customize it for your project.

It is important to understand that your project is *not* farmOS, but rather
farmOS is a *dependency* of your project. You can see this clearly by observing
that `farmos/farmos` is included in your `composer.json` file's `require`

> section.

Reviewer: As a reader, it's not very clear **why** it is important to understand this... I'm guessing we just want them to name it something other than "farmOS" to avoid conflicts.

Author: Yea I see what you mean. I rearranged the text to try to make that more clear:

https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS/pull/648/commits/8d0149d561169af26ad7bb3e3f613697e17eea42

   the specific version that were downloaded. This `composer.lock` file should
   be committed to source control. It ensures that building the project again
   will always use the same versions of dependencies, for reproducible builds.

### Ignoring files

At this point there will be many files in your directory that should *not* be
committed to source control. Best practice is to ignore them with a `.gitignore` file.

Example `.gitignore`:

```
# Ignore Composer-generated files.
.editorconfig
.gitattributes
vendor
web/*

# farmOS uses this to store OAuth2 keys.
keys

# This creates an exception for ./web/modules/custom, which can be used for
# custom module code that is part of this repository.
!web/modules
web/modules/*
!web/modules/custom
```

### Community modules

farmOS community modules can be added to your project via Composer.

For example, this will add the
[farmOS Bee](https://www.drupal.org/project/farm_bee) module:

    composer require drupal/farm_bee

Notice that `composer.json` and `composer.lock` are automatically updated.
Commit these changes to ensure the module will be downloaded every time your
codebase is built.

### Custom modules

> The example `.gitignore` includes a special rule to exclude the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example `.gitignore` above includes a special rule to exclude the
```

Author: Fixed here: https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS/pull/648/commits/f879094ac144184f5ebb6b6e7048f4ca6775e30b

> `./web/modules/custom` directory. This allows you to build custom modules
> within your project and commit them to source control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`./web/modules/custom` directory. This allows you to include your own custom modules
within your project and commit them to source control.
```

Maybe avoid the word "build" here since it potentially opens up a (out of scope) can of worms regarding modules that have a build step.

Author: Yea good call: https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS/pull/648/commits/2dd1a5bb18691239fe8f3e61c2a040dc867ce100

For example, create a directory called `./web/modules/custom/mymodule.info.yml`
with the following content:

```yaml
name: My module
description: A custom module for my farmOS project.
type: module
package: farmOS Custom
core_version_requirement: ^9
```

This can be committed to your project's Git repository, and installed in your

> farmOS instance via the web UI or by running `drush en mymodule`.

Reviewer: Do we want to make a recommendation about how to fork/extend [these lists](https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS/blob/d8ff8e1cbdf201b97a322cc60c9fd44133743e26/farm.profile#L21-L45) to add the module to the default/optional modules for a new site?

Author: I don't think we need to. That list (and the form at `/farm/settings/modules` is targeted at users with less privileges, but this guide is targeted at site admins with full admin access. Maybe it would be worth adding some guidance to our existing module development docs more generally, but that would be a separate PR...

Reviewer: Maybe I'm wrong, but isn't that list also used for the initial module selection during the site-install step?

If so, that's the list I was thinking would be cool to document customizing since it would provide a convenient way for derived projects to customize the default/optional modules for their use-case.

## Updating dependencies

Composer provides a simple way to update project dependencies:

    composer update --no-dev

This will check for newer versions of all your project's dependencies (based
on the version constraints in your `composer.json` file), install them, and
update your `composer.lock` file automatically.

It is important to run automated database updates and rebuild caches whenever
farmOS and/or dependency modules are updated. For this reason, it is good to
develop a deployment strategy that includes these steps whenever a new version
of your project's code is deployed. See [Updating farmOS](/hosting/update) for
more information.

### Pinning versions

The `farmos/farmos` dependency in the farmOS project template `composer.json`
defaults to `^2.0`, which means "the latest stable version of the 2.x branch".

You may want to pin this (or other dependencies) to a specific version so that
you can be very intentional with your upgrade process.

To pin the `farmos/farmos` dependency to a specific version (eg: `2.0.1`),
replace `^2.0` with `2.0.1` and run `composer update --no-dev`.

To update pinned dependencies, simply update the version in `composer.json` and

> run `composer update --no-dev` again.

Reviewer: Should this remind folks to check the section above for running automated updates and clearing caches?

Author: Yea we should. Fixed here: https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS/pull/648/commits/4decb602b87a3e62a206889b0cc56de24fc702d3

## Docker

Composer is only responsible for building the farmOS codebase. After that, it
is up to you to deploy it. One way to do this is with Docker.

As described above, the "official" farmOS Docker images are built using the
default farmOS project template. You can use a similar approach to build
custom Docker images with your custom codebase.

Example `Dockerfile`:

```Dockerfile
# Inherit from the upsteam farmOS 2.x image.
FROM farmos/farmos:2.x

# Create a fresh /var/farmOS directory.
RUN rm -r /var/farmOS && mkdir /var/farmOS

# Copy composer.json and composer.lock into the image.
COPY composer.json /var/farmOS/composer.json
COPY composer.lock /var/farmOS/composer.lock

# Build the farmOS codebase with Composer as the www-data user in /var/farmOS

> # with the --no-dev flag and change the ownership of the

Reviewer: of the [what?] :)

Author: Good catch!

Fixed here: https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS/pull/648/commits/86e0f45748f580fe2a05f8a2f0489f02d79f79ce

### Ignoring files

At this point there will be many files in your directory that should *not* be
committed to source control. Best practice is to ignore them with a `.gitignore` file.

Example `.gitignore`:

```
# Ignore Composer-generated files.
.editorconfig
.gitattributes
vendor
web/*

# farmOS uses this to store OAuth2 keys.
keys

# This creates an exception for ./web/modules/custom, which can be used for
# custom module code that is part of this repository.
!web/modules
web/modules/*
!web/modules/custom
```

### Community modules

farmOS community modules can be added to your project via Composer.

For example, this will add the
[farmOS Bee](https://www.drupal.org/project/farm_bee) module:

    composer require drupal/farm_bee

Notice that `composer.json` and `composer.lock` are automatically updated.
Commit these changes to ensure the module will be downloaded every time your
codebase is built.

### Custom modules

The example `.gitignore` above includes a special rule to exclude the
`./web/modules/custom` directory. This allows you to include your own custom
modules within your project and commit them to source control.

> For example, create a directory called `./web/modules/custom/mymodule.info.yml`

Reviewer 2: Should we recommend a `mymodule` subdirectory? This would make it easier to add additional custom modules in the future. `./web/modules/custom/mymodule/mymodule.info.yml`

Author: Oh good catch @paul121!

Fixed here: https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS/pull/648/commits/dad67fdbd7b86c992a0e2abe9e210d7f7c6a873d

You can use this `composer.json` as the starting point for your own project's
code repository with [Git](https://git-scm.com/):

> ```shell

Reviewer: ooh, nice! I like this better than the `sh` I've been using to indicate generic/roughly-posix shell commands!

Author: Oh yea I just went with `shell` because that's what my PHPStorm suggested.

git init
git add composer.json
git commit -m 'Intitial commit of my farmOS project.'
```

It is important to understand that your project is *not* farmOS, but rather
farmOS is a *dependency* of your project. You can see this clearly by observing
that `farmos/farmos` is included in your `composer.json` file's `require`
section. To customize your project, open `composer.json` in a text editor and

> change the metadata (eg: `name`, `description`, `homepage`, etc).

Reviewer: I still think there would be value in at least alluding to ***why*** it is important for readers understand this distinction. Are we just trying to avoid a bunch of confusing/misleading project.json files scattered over the Internet, or is there something that will break if they don't choose a different/distinct project name?

Author: I think my motivation for including this is because I want it to be clear that you are not forking/modifying farmOS itself, but rather you are creating your own project that includes farmOS as a dependency. I don't think this distinction is obvious to someone who is new to Composer. I helped some devs who are new to PHP and web dev in general set up their project and explaining this to them helped make it click.

Author: I think it's not uncommon for someone to think of farmOS as an "app" - but really it is an installation profile of Drupal, which must be instantiated as a dependency of a Composer project, along with scaffolding for the Drupal webroot etc. It's confusing, so I'm hoping that explicitly describing the fact that "farmOS is a dependency of *your* project" helps to clarify some of that here.

Author: > Are we just trying to avoid a bunch of confusing/misleading project.json files scattered over the Internet, or is there something that will break if they don't choose a different/distinct project name?

I don't think there's any risk, I just wanted to convey a better understanding of how the pieces relate.

Maybe the wording "It is **important** to understand..." is too strong? Perhaps "It is **helpful** to understand..." would be better?

Author: What do you think @symbioquine ? https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS/pull/648/commits/7aec2aa1b613a879689ba44ded03c3bead06c8dd

Reviewer: Much better!
